backtracks non-chronologically to the First UIP. By backtracking
to the appropriate level and enforcing the learned clause (which
typically negates the UIP), CDCL guarantees that the solver
does not revisit the same conflict based on the current partial
assignment.
• Variable Decision (decide): If no conflict occurs, a new
decision is made by selecting a variable and assigning a value to
it. Typically, heuristics are used to prioritize variables, improving
search efficiency by guiding the solver toward likely solutions.
CDCL can be viewed as a process of consecutive refutation: each
time unit propagation uncovers a conflict, the solver locates the
--
of the search space.
• Phase Saving: Phase saving retains the most recent variable
assignments from previous search attempts, which can be reused
in future decisions. This minimizes the impact of unsuccessful
searches and guides the solver toward a solution.
• Variable Decision Heuristics: These heuristics guide the
decision-making process in choosing which variables to assign.
By dynamically adjusting the decision strategy based on the
search history, heuristics help prioritize variables that are more
likely to lead to a solution.
Besides, what is not shown in the algorithm list is the data structure
--
I/O Manager

State
Registers

Variable Decision
Engine

Fig. 1. The Overall architecture of VeriSAT

A. Early Works
--
be organized as three principal modules, each corresponding to a core
step of the CDCL framework:
• Propagation Search Engine (PSE): Implements Boolean Constraint Propagation (BCP). PSE scans watched clauses to detect
conflicts or unit clauses. Upon encountering a conflict, it invokes
the Conflict Analysis Engine; if no conflict and no further unit
clauses remain, it hands control to the Variable Decision Engine.
• Conflict Analysis Engine (CAE): Performs conflict analysis
when PSE reports a conflict. CAE analyzes the implication
graph to derive a learned clause and compute the backtracking
level. If the backtracking level is negative, the solver concludes
UNSAT. Otherwise, CAE appends the learned clause to the
clause database, backjumps to the computed decision level, and
returns the control to PSE.
• Variable Decision Engine (VDE): Responsible for branching
decisions. VDE applies a dynamic variable selection heuristic
to pick an unassigned variable and assigns it a truth value. If
all variables are assigned without conflict, the solver concludes
SAT. Otherwise, VDE updates the heuristic data structures and
invokes PSE to continue propagation.
It should be noted that, based on the foundation of the current
CDCL algorithm, all three main modules must run alternately to
maintain the correctness and completeness of the algorithm. Unlike
other hardware pipelining schemes that require multiple modules to
--
signal to all other cursors and forwards the conflicting clause
to the Conflict Analysis Engine.
4) Completion. If no conflict arises, the dispatcher continues to
assign the remaining unscanned literals to idle cursors. Once
all newly enqueued literals have been processed and no further
propagation is possible, control returns to the Variable Decision
Engine.
2) Maintaining Read-Write Consistency: The concurrent execution of cursors may cause data hazard, we implement a lightweight
arbitration mechanism to maintain the read-write consistency:
Read-Write Arbitration: Before each read or write, every
cursor broadcasts its target address to a comparison network.
--
retrieved 3 cycles ago, and henceforth a valid literal data. Similar
procedure is applied to retrieving the decision level and visited mark
data.
With this simple pipeline design, the efficiency of conflict analysis
in VeriSAT is dramatically improved.
E. Variable Decision Engine
The Variable Decision Engine (VDE) is invoked after unit propagation when no conflicts are detected. It selects the next branching
variable using the Variable State Independent Decay Sum (VSIDS)
heuristic. The VDE maintains an activity score table for each variable,
which is initialized to 0 and updated during conflict analysis. The
decay factor of 0.9275 is calculated as x − (x ≫ 16), avoiding
floating-point operations to minimize the hardware complexity.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Duke University. Downloaded on January 03,2026 at 03:22:39 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
--
Visited Mark
Arrived
Fig. 4. The Pipeline optimization. The cells on horizontal direction indicates
the cycles used

The VDE uses a min-heap to efficiently select the variable with the
least activity score in O(log n) time. The maintenance of the min-heap
is non-blocking; updates to the variable scores and decision-making
logic will check if the heap is busy and wait until maintenance is
completed.
Additionally, phase saving ensures the variable phase is stored
before a restart and restored afterward, reducing redundant searches
and improving solver efficiency.
V. I MPLEMENTATION OF V ERI SAT
--
Freq.
Impl.
CDCL
2-lit Watching
Phase Saving
VSIDS
Restart
Clause Del.
Clause Min.

VeriSAT
